Chapter 4 - information visualization

Effective communication of complex quantitative ideas.
Clarity, precision, efficiency.

Help you notice things about the data that might go unnoticed.

Highlight information of interest, or tell a story.

Example. Napoleon's march on Russia. Sheer amount of loss in graphic.
Flow line of Napoleon's army. 400k -> 100k

Retreat frozen, only 10k left.

Four important ingredients to visualization: visual cues, coordinate systems, scale / data types, and context.

Position - visual encoding - space efficient
Length - bar charts
Angle - think pie charts - parts of a whole - avoid if small difference
Direction - slope of line - see increases/decreases - small changes tricky
Shape - different values
Area/volume of shape

Visual encoding - color hue and saturation.
Diff color - diff groups
Saturation - intensity of color - intensity or quantity of value
When using color - don't use more than a dozen hues. Gets hard to differentiate

Ranking of accuracy: position, angle, area, saturation
Most -> least
position, length, angle, direction, area, volume, saturation, hue

Plotting in python
Many packages
	- matplotlib is very popular
	- ggplot - like R library
We're going to use ggplot - why? 
	- looks a little better
	- grammar of graphics
	- plays nice with pandas dataframes

Grammar of graphics
	- plots convey information through aesthetics (xpos, ypos, etc)
	- elements in a plot are geometric shapes (points, lines, bars)

Plotting python:

1. make plot
ggplot(data, aes(xvar, yvar))
data is a pandas dataframe
xvar, yvar are columns in the dataframe
ggplot(data, aes(xvar, yvar)) + geom_point(color = 'coral') + geom_line(color = 'coral') + ggtitle('title') + xlab('x-label') + ylab('y-label')

(see basic_plot.py for implementation that works locally)

Data types:
- numeric data
	- discrete (homerun #) or continuous (player batting average)
- categorical data
	- represents characteristics - may take numeric values (e.g. number code position) - but no mathematical meaning.
	- ordinal data - some categories, but ranking e.g. rank movie 1-5
	- ordinal data is treated categorically, but ordered low to high
- time series
	- data collected via repeated measurements over time
	- e.g. homeruns hit by player over time.

Scales
categorical - bar plot with positions vs. homeruns

Time can be measured with different granularities. Days, months, years. Depends on what you are trying to communicate with data.

Bad graph. Why is it bad? My answer:
The rows of people and dots together are confusing. The people graphic doesn't seem to be scaling. You could also have an issue with the lack of a y-axis suggesting nurses have increased ~90$  in the last few years. Also, is the last element here incorporating 14 months, vs. 12 for the others? That's misleading.

Answer: 4 sick people = 43000. 28 sick people = 3000. 8 sick people = 1000x


